Chinese State media say rival
Palestinian factions including Hamas and
fata have signed a declaration in
Beijing to form a national Unity
government at some unspecified time
after the end of Israel's war in Gaza
the two groups have competed for power
in Gaza and the West Bank for years this
Beijing declaration is aimed at
strengthening Palestinian unity and
involves more than a dozen Palestinian
factions amass is considered a terrorist
group by the US EU and other states but
not by China Israel moved swiftly to
reject the agreement declaring that
hamas's rule will be
crushed it's a pack that could end years
of infighting between rival Palestinian
factions representatives from fata and
Hamas have Inked what host China calls a
national Unity deal it also includes a
dozen other Palestinian groups the
outcome has defied expectations as
previous attempts at bridging their
divisions have failed Hamas runs Gaza
while F controls parts of the occupied
West Bank after feuding for nearly two
decades they have committed to a new
chapter today we sign an agreement for
National
unity and we believe that this is the
path to completing our
journey we are committed to National
unity and we call for it
China unlike many Western Nations does
not consider Hamas a terror organization
The Pact is a major diplomatic coup for
broker Beijing China is Keen to bolster
its influence in the region and to
present itself as a peacemaker on the
international
stage after repeating calls for a
ceasefire in Gaza Beijing laid out its
vision for the territory postwar
the second step is to uphold the
principle of Palestinians governing
Palestine and work together to advance
the post-war governance of Gaza the war
has left Gaza devastated and an early
start to post-war reconstruction has
become an urgent issue in the next
stage but Israel has vowed to eliminate
Hamas for carrying out the October 7
Terror attacks and firmly rejects their
involvement in governing Gaza
the future of the strip is a major
sticking point as Israel and Hamas weigh
an internationally backed ceasefire
proposal John B Alman is with the Middle
East program of the center for strategic
and International Studies welcome to DW
what do you make of this
deal uh I think it's an interesting step
I'm not sure how much it's actually
going to mean there's a lot that will
need to come between seeming to have a
unified Palestinian position and
Palestinians acting
together uh I think while there's
nothing moving in the Palestinian space
it's an interesting step to take but I'm
not sure this changes the picture for
anything once people start having to
make decisions exactly there there do
seem to be lots of ifs around this this
this deal looks like it'll if come into
effect at some unspecified time in the
future when if the war in Gaza is over
and it's such a big if it makes you
wonder if the deal is really just an
opportunity for China to play at
peacemaking well I China wants to
demonstrate that it has diplomatic chops
that it can talk to all kinds of people
it can bring together people who
ordinarily can't find ways to talk
together that's certainly what China was
doing when it facilitated a Saudi
Iranian deal about 15 months ago but the
reason this is so hard is because the
stakes become very high you're talking
about a lot of power a lot of money and
people perceive it as a zero some game
either you're on the the PLO side or on
the Hamas side and ultimately for a lot
of people there those are two
incompatible organizations either one's
going to win or the other that the
Chinese like to talk about win-win
Solutions but it's easier to have
win-win Solutions
when you're only talking about talking
and it's harder to have win-win
Solutions when people say you know
somebody really could lose here and they
don't just lose now they lose billions
of dollars for decades into the future
neither one is willing to do that and
Israel of course has said that this deal
is nonsense and will move to crush Hamas
and what does it tell us that a what you
might call interested party like Israel
didn't learn about this deal until after
it was done
well I'm sure they knew it was I mean I
knew it was moving forward I I did some
interviews as was as they were talking
about going what it actually is going to
mean I'm not really sure it's partly
what it means in the Palestinian
environment where neither side really
has a lot of legitimacy because each
side has has failed in any number of
ways but on the Israeli side if you
can't get Israelis to acknowledge it
then what tools do you actually have to
effectuate it um I think what is sort of
missing from this whole thing is a
theory of the
case of how all the parties are going to
be brought together and whether that's
about stopping violence in Gaza or
leading toward some sort of
reconstruction in Gaza or thinking about
what the political future in Gaza is I
think ultimately you're going to need a
lot of stakeholders and the Palestinian
side can say in theory we've decided to
come together
but going from that to having any
solution to the the really desperate
challenges of 2 million people in Gaza
there's a long way to go and we're only
at the very beginning of that Journey
okay so China gets to play a peacemaker
in the Middle East fine talk to us more
about how uh China's relations with
Israel which of course is is is going to
be relevant to this has China for
instance picked a side in the Israel
Hamas conflict
well traditionally China was very much
on the Palestinian side in the last
decade maybe two China has gotten a
little closer to Israel they have
certainly tried to engage with Israelis
on issues of Technology surveillance to
some degree of some some Weapons Systems
although the United States was very
careful to ensure that that American
weapons technology didn't migrate
through Israel to China uh and there's
been some Chinese investment in Israel
but since October 7 we've seen an
increasing distance between China and
Israel and China has really decided to
double down on the idea that we are the
the leaders of the global South the
global South includes the Palestinian
national movement and Israel is part of
an oppressive hegemonic effort to
deprive the Palestinian of what they
rightly deserve uh there's been a lot of
daylight between Israel and China in the
last nine months I don't think that's
going to go away quickly but of course
Israel does have things that China wants
and Israel also thinks it's important as
you go through the world China is a
great power and it's good to have good
relations with great Powers CH Israel
was very serious about not just having
good relations with the United States
but inculcating good relations with both
China and Russia I think Israel is going
to be open to better relations with
China and I would expect that when the
dust settles China will be open to
improving relations with Israel in the
years to come thanks for talking us
through that John B timman from the
center for strategic and international
studies thank you very much